1)what is git ?
Git is a distributed version control system that helps track changes in code, enabling collaboration and history management in software development.

2) difference between Git and GitHub ?
Git                                                                 GitHub
----                                                                -------
1)      Git is a software.	                             1)GitHub is a service.
2.	Git is a command-line tool	                     2GitHub is a graphical user interface
3.	Git is installed locally on the system	             GitHub is hosted on the web
4.	Git is maintained by linux.	                     GitHub is maintained by Microsoft.
5.	Git is focused on version control                    GitHub is focused on centralized source code hosting. 
                      and code sharing.	
6.	Git is a version control system                      GitHub is a hosting service for Git repositories
                 to manage source code history.  	                                                        .
7.	Git was first released in 2005.                       GitHub was launched in 2008.
8.	Git has no user management feature.                  GitHub has a built-in user management feature. 	
9.	Git is open-source licensed.	                     GitHub includes a free-tier and pay-for-use tier.

3)What is the abbreviation of VCS? 
The abbreviation VCS stands for Version Control System.

4)What is the abbreviation of SCM? 
The abbreviation SCM stands for Source Control Management or Software Configuration Management.

5)Write down 5 SCM names?
Git – A distributed version control system widely used in both open-source and enterprise environments.
Subversion (SVN) – A centralized version control system often used for larger projects and teams.
Mercurial – A distributed version control system known for its performance and scalability.
Perforce – A centralized version control system commonly used in industries that require robust scalability, like gaming and large-scale development projects.
IBM Rational ClearCase – A configuration management tool used by enterprises, supporting version control and workspace management.

6)what is Branch?
A branch is a parallel version of a repository, allowing developers to work on changes independently without affecting the main codebase.

7)what is a tag?
A tag is a labeled snapshot of a specific point in a repository’s history, often used to mark release versions.

8)What is the difference between Branch and Tag? 
A branch :Branch is a movable line of development that allows ongoing changes, enabling parallel workstreams that can later be merged back into the main codebase.
A tag : tag is a fixed snapshot of a specific commit, often used to mark stable releases or significant milestones, and does not change over time.

9)When we will create the branch and when we will the create tag? 
creation of branch
--------------------
Create a Branch when you need to work on a new feature, fix a bug, or experiment without affecting the main codebase. Branches are ideal for isolating development tasks until they’re ready to be merged back into the main or production branch.
creation of Tag
----------------
Create a Tag when you want to mark a specific, stable point in your codebase, often for releases. Tags are commonly used to label release versions (e.g., v1.0, v2.1) so you can easily reference a specific state of the code for future reference or deployment.


10)What is “git add” command will do? 
The git add command stages changes (new files, modifications, or deletions) in the working directory

11)What is the command to revert the code from staging area to working area? 
The command to revert code from the staging area back to the working area is: ------>git reset <file>
to unstage all staged files: ------>git reset


12)What is the git revert command?
The git revert command is used to create a new commit that undoes the changes made in a previous commit.
the command is ---->git revert <commit-hash>

13)What is the difference between fetch and pull in Git? 
git fetch :just gets the changes without affecting your working directory.
git pull  :fetches the changes and merges them into your current branch

14)How to see how many branches are currently available in git repo? 
Local branches:git branch
Remote branches:git branch -r
All branches (local and remote):git branch -a

15)What is the command to create the branch? 
 the command to create the branch -----> git branch <branch-name>

16)How to switch from branch to another branch? 
to switch from branch to another branch ------>git checkout <branch-name>

17)How to create branch and how to switch to that branch in one command?
 to create branch and how to switch to that branch in one command --------> git checkout -b <branch-name>

18)What is the command to delete the branch in local repo? 
           git branch -d <branch-name>

19)What is the command to delete branch in remote repo? 
          git push origin --delete <branch-name>


20)What is git stash command? 
Stash changes: ------> git stash
Stash changes including untracked files: ----> git stash -u
List all stashed changes: -----> git stash list
Apply the latest stash: -----> git stash apply
Apply a specific stash: ------> git stash apply stash@{n}
Remove a specific stash: ------> git stash drop stash@{n}
Pop the latest stash: -------> git stash pop 
Clear all stashes: ------> git stash clear

21)What is PAT? 
PAT stands for Personal Access Token. It is a secure alternative to using passwords for authentication when interacting with services like GitHub, GitLab, Azure DevOps, or other Git hosting services.

22)What is SSH key and how to generate ssh-key? 
An SSH keys used to authenticate securely between your local machine and a remote server (like GitHub, GitLab, or Azure DevOps). 
It consists of two parts:
Public key: Shared with the remote service (like a Git hosting provider).
Private key: Kept secret on your local machine.

23)What is the default path for ssh keys? 
The default path for SSH keys is:
Private key:--------------->  ~/.ssh/id_rsa
Public key:----------------> ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub


24)How to rename the branch name? 
                    git branch -m <new-branch-name>

25)What is the command to get the code from remote git repo? 
                    git clone <repository-url>

26)What is the command to see all git messages in local repo? 
        git log --oneline---->all msgs in one line 
        git log ------->View the full commit history

27)How to create the repository in git? 
          Go to GitHub, log in, and click on New Repository.

28)What is SubGit? 
SubGit : subgit is a tool that enables bidirectional synchronization between Git and Subversion (SVN) repositories, migration and parallel usage of both version control systems.

29)In Which language Git is developed?
      Git is developed in C programming language.

30)What is the difference between git merge and git rebase? 
   Git Merge                                                                                      Git Rebase                     
   ------------                                                                                  -------------
                                                               
Git Merge merges two branches to create a “feature” branch.	                Git Rebase rebases the feature branch to add the feature branch to the main branch.
Git Merge is comparatively easy. 	                                        Git Rebase is comparatively harder.
Git Merge safeguards history.	                                                Git Rebase doesn’t safeguard history.
Git Merge is more suitable for projects with the less active main branch.	Git Rebase is suitable for projects with frequently active main branches.
Git Merge forms a chain-like structure.	                                        Git Rebase forms a linear structure.
Git Merge is preferable for large no. of people working on a project.	        Git Rebase is preferable for small groups of people.
Single line command is:  git merge feature main                                 Single line command is: git rebase main

31)What is the difference between git checkout and git reset and git revert?


git checkout                                                      git reset                                             git revert
--------------                                                  -------------                                         ---------------
1)Discards the changes in the                 1)Untages a file and bring our changes back to the       1)Removes the commits from the remote repository
working repository                                                    working repository  
2)Used in the local repository.               2)Used in the local repository.                           2)Used in the remote repository.
3)Does not make any changes to                3)Alters the existing commit history,                     3)Adds a new commit to the existing commit history.
          the commit history
4)Can be used to manipulate                   4)Can be used to manipulate commits or files.             4)Does not manipulate your commits or files.
           commits or files.


32)What is the git workflow? 
The Git workflow is a process for managing code changes with version control. Here’s a simplified version:

Clone the main repository to your local machine.
Create a new branch for your work.
Make changes, then commit them with a message.
Push your branch to the remote repository.
Open a Pull Request (PR) to merge your changes into the main branch.
After review and approval, merge your branch.
Delete the branch if it’s no longer needed.
Pull updates to keep your local main branch in sync.

33)What is merge conflicts? Have you resolved the merge conflicts? 
i)Identify Conflicts
ii)Edit the Conflicts
iii)Stage the Resolved Files:----> git add <conflicted-file>
iv)Complete the Merge: ---->  git commit

34)How to see how many files are committed in one particular commit id? 
                       git show --stat <commit-id>

35)What is git hooks? Can you name some git hooks? 
Git hooks are scripts that Git can run automatically at specific points in the Git workflow, allowing you to automate tasks, enforce policies, and manage project standards.
Git hooks are stored in the .git/hooks directory.
Types of Git Hooks --->2types
-------------------
Client-Side Hooks: Run on local machines to enforce rules before or after a commit, merge, or push.
----------------
Server-Side Hooks: Run on Git servers to enforce rules during a git push, git receive, or git update.
------------------
Common Git Hooks
----------------
pre-commit:------->  Runs before a commit is finalized. Often used to check code style or run tests.
prepare-commit-msg:  -------->  Runs before the commit message editor is displayed, allowing modification of the commit message.
commit-msg: -------- > Runs after the commit message is entered, allowing validation of the message content.
post-commit:  ------------>  Runs after a commit is completed, often used to send notifications.
pre-push: ----------->   Runs before a push, often used to ensure that all tests pass before pushing.
pre-receive (server-side):  -------->  Runs on the server before accepting a push, allowing validation of changes.
post-receive (server-side): -------->   Runs on the server after a push, commonly used to deploy code or notify a team.

36) What is .gitignore file? 
The .gitignore file lists files and folders that Git should ignore in a project. This keeps unnecessary files—like build files, environment configs, 
or system files—out of version control. By adding file names or patterns to .gitignore, Git won’t track or commit those files to the repository.



























